Vivid Ink Library E-Commerce Website
Video Demo:  <https://youtu.be/hDtCZ6sYXIc>
Description:
Vivid Ink Library is a project that took months and months to complete—from the brainstorming, the visualization, the planning, and learning new skills. Now, I proudly present my very first big project as a developer.

Vivid Ink Library is a simple e-commerce website. First, users have to sign up if they don't have an account yet. After signing up, they can now log in. After logging in, they can now preview the product categories on the homepage. This project has a simple functionality for browsing products where users can add products to their cart. If they are too lazy to scroll in and find the product they want, they can just search it on the header of the page. In their cart, users can remove products if they ever change their mind. It also has an input box where users can type in the specific address they want their product to be delivered in. Users can also select if they want free shipping or if they need the product urgently where they need to pay a shipping fee. This delivery option is inspired by the Amazon project I previously did in one of my other courses. Originally, I planned to add an online payment option. However, due to some limitations, I am not able to accomplish that. I am not able to find a free API and something that I can integrate into my project. So I stick to no online payment and just settle with cash-on-delivery. After the user completes filling out the details of their order, they can now place their order. They can see their purchases in the navigation on the sidebar. They can see their pending, completed, and canceled orders. They can also cancel their pending orders. Refund or return of orders is not supported. Users can also submit a review in the navigation in the sidebar for reviews.
Lastly, I also made a page for privacy policy and terms & conditions for users to see.

I also added the admin functionality where the admin can sign in at the link provided on the login page where they will be prompted to enter the admin username and password. The admin dashboard is made as interactive as possible with the help of Bootstrap. In the books tab, the admin will have the features to add products where a pop-up window will be displayed and the admin can now add products. Also, the admin can update the stocks of each product listed. They also can delete products. In the orders tab, the admin can manage orders. They can click the complete button if the product is delivered and they received the payment. Or they can cancel the order. In the reviews tab, the admin can see all the reviews submitted by customers. They can also delete bad reviews.

Moving on to the database named ecommerce.db. It consists of seven tables. The first one is the products table where I stored the productid, barcode, name, category, description, price, stocks, and product_image.
I also have the cart table to temporarily store the items in the cart of the user of that session. I am storing the customerid, productid, quantity, and sessionid. After placing the order, the cart of the customer will be cleared. Another is the customers table where I stored the information of the users. It has the column for customerid, firstname, lastname, username, email, hashedpassword, address, and phone_number of users. I stored the hashpassword only because it is not good practice to store raw pasword. Another table called reviews stored the reviewid, customerid, feedback, and the review_date of the reviews that customers submitted. Another table is orderdetails that stores the orderdetailsid, orderid, productid, quantity, unitprice, and subtotal.This table reference the orderid in orders table. It stores all the orders the users made. And then we also have the orders table to store each order made. This table just store the the summary of all orders made, not each items. Because each items was stored in orderdetails. Orders table stored the orderid, customerid, orderdate, deliverydate, productstotal, shippingfee, grandtotal, status, order_tracking_id and delivery_address. Lastly, it has the admin table the stored the adminid, firstname, lastname, username, email, and hashedpassword of admin.

Now moving on to explaining what each of the files in my project does.
First, the layout.html is the main blueprint for my project where I've implemented the sidebar and the header to navigate between pages and search items. Secondly, it has the loglayout.html which is the blueprint for the login and sign-up page. This is where all the javascript files are attached.
In admin.html, we can see how the admin dashboard is implemented using Bootstrap. We can also see the books tab, orders tab, and reviews tab where the admin can navigate.
In adminlogin.html, there is a simple login form for the admin.
In books.html, there was a loop to display all products with the quantity input box and add to cart button for each of them. In cart.html, users can view all the items in their cart along with the details of those products. It also has the form to remove items from the cart. On the right side, we have the order summary to display the number of items in the cart, the subtotal of all the products in the cart, as well as the shipping fee selected from delivery options, and the total of the subtotal and shipping fee. Users can also input their delivery address. In editproduct.html, it has a simple form that allows the admin to update stocks of a certain product.
In forgotpassword.html, I made a simple page that says the feature is currently unavailable. In home.html, I also use Bootstrap to display each preview of the products by category with a see more button to see all products in that category.
In login.html, it has a simple form where the user can log in as well as the signup button and the admin portal link. In signup.html, it has a simple form of input box where users can input their credentials. As well as the link to the login page. In purchases.html, I also use Bootstrap to display different tabs for pending, completed, and canceled orders or users. In reviews.html, I also use Bootstrap to display a simple form where users can submit their reviews. Searchresults.html is a page to displays all the results of the query in the search box in the header. Lastly, privacy.html and terms.html a pages that display the privacy policy and terms & conditions respectively.


Moving on to the main backbone of this project which is the app.py.
First, at the top of the file, I have imported all the necessary libraries. Some of them are the CS50 to get access to the SQL version of CS50. And flask, to get the functionalities inside the flask framework.
And then set up the app, database, and sessions. After that, I implemented the login_required route to check if the user ID is in session, and if not, it will prevent the user from accessing certain pages. And will be prompted back to the login page. And then index route to render the home.html.
We have the books route to display all products from the products table into the page sorted by category. We also have the search route to render a page for searchresults.html that displays the products that match the query from the search box. One of the most important routes is the cart route, where the main functionality lies. This route is responsible for displaying all the items in the cart table, calculating the total price, and letting the user choose delivery options.
We also have the add-to-cart route, as the name suggests, which is responsible for adding products to a cart. It first checks if the items are already in the cart, if it is, just update the quantity. If not, we have to insert that product into the cart.  On the other hand, we have the remove from cart route that deletes selected items from the cart. Then I have the get cart item count function that is used inside the inject cart count function that is used to get the total quantity of items on the page to be displayed. The main route which is the place an order, get all the input from the form first, check if all the fields have values, And then insert the cart table items to the orders table. Insert the details of that order in the order details table and then update the stocks after the customers place the order. Lastly, it deletes all items from the cart of that user. Then it has the update shipping fee route to update the shipping fee displayed on the page every time the user selects another delivery option. Next, it has the purchases route that selects orders with the status of pending, completed, and canceled and displays it on the tab on the page. About the previous route, we have the cancel order route to let users cancel orders by updating the status of that order to cancel.
Then we have the privacy policy and terms & conditions route that simply display that. Then we have a reviews route that renders the reviews.html. And submit review route to let the user submit reviews.
Another main route is the admin dashboard which displays all the products on the page, pending orders, and all the reviews. In relation to the previous route, we have the add product route that adds the product and all of its details to the database, as well as the product image. It also has a delete product route that does what its name suggests. However, it has some limitations because it cannot delete products that already exist in other tables because of dependencies and key constraints. Still related routes are the edit product route which lets the admin update the number of stocks, the complete order route which lets the admin mark an order as completed if the admin has received payment, cancel order route which lets the admin cancel some orders, and delete route to allow admin to delete reviews especially the negative ones.
Then it has the forgot password route that simply renders the forgotpassword.html. And inject the user function to get the username of the user currently in session to be displayed on the page. Then we have the signup and login route for admin and users, as well as the log-out route that simply lets the user create an account, log in, and log out.


In this section, I will give credit to all the tools I use to help me complete this project. To generate the icons in the header and the sidebar, I used copilot. To edit the images to preview products by category, I used Canva. I use amazon.com to verify product prices. I utilized ChatGPT to help me solve problems and errors. I used CS50's own AI to ask for good practices when it came to my project and verify if I was doing the right thing. I use Bootstrap to make designing and animation easier. I used Shopify to generate privacy policy and terms & conditions.
These are the programming languages and tools I used as well. I used HTML, CSS, JavaScript, Python, SQL, and Jinja to develop this project. As well as the Flask for my framework.

